Model predictive control of an axial dispersion tubular reactor with recycle:
a distributed parameter system with state delay

In many petrochemical, biochemical, and pharmaceutical unit operations, transport-reaction processes are described by distributed parameter system (DPS) models. Utilizing DPS models has brought about the ability to capture the intrinsic features of such unit operations, i.e., reactions, convection, and diffusion, within a finite spatial domain. [Harmon Ray] Various types of delays have also been addressed using DPS models in the same field. Hence the corresponding systems are typically formulated using partial differential equations (PDEs), making them belong to the class of infinite-dimensional systems. [Curtain]
DPS models may be addressed by using either the “Early Lumping” or the “Late Lumping” method. In the early lumping approach, the original infinite-dimensional system is reduced to a finite-dimensional system. Such approximation however might result in an unwanted mismatch between the behaviour of the original system and its finite-dimensional approximation. [14] Another approach to address DPS models is to use the “Late Lumping” method, i.e., to treat the original system as an infinite-dimensional system, followed by implementing numerical methods to get the solutions. While using the late lumping method produces more accurate models to predict the behaviour of the original system, the control of the DPS becomes mathematically challenging. [Harmon Ray]
In the field of chemical and process engineering, axial dispersion tubular reactors are among the distributed parameter systems that have been receiving a significant amount of attention from academia and the industry, due to not only their prevalence but the complexity of their practical realization. Numerous works have been done on the modelling and control of axial dispersion tubular reactors as distributed parameter systems. For instance, control of an axial dispersion tubular reactor with an instantaneous recycle has been studied. [Hamid] On the other hand, another important class of chemical and process engineering problems that classify as infinite dimensional systems are those that show some aspect of delay. [1] The notion of delay in these systems may be equivalently represented by an infinite-dimensional pure transport setup. [Curtain] Although delay systems that refer to input-output delays are well-known in the field of chemical engineering and process control, [2, 3] less or no attention has been drawn to those systems with state delays. This may have resulted from the fact that such systems are assumed to be uncommon in the field of chemical and process systems engineering.
Acknowledging tubular reactors equipped with recycle as one of the most widely used industrial setups, it can be shown that to model such a common chemical engineering, one may need to use the notion of state delay as it takes time for the recycled flow to re-enter the reactor inlet. This is shown in the Figure attached. Therefore, the behaviour of a tubular reactor with recycle is modelled using an infinite-dimensional transient system of transport and state delay, addressed by the Late Lumping approach. Knowing that most modern control strategies focus on discrete-time setting, a Cayley-Tustin transformation is used to convert the original continuous-time infinite-dimensional system to its discrete-time alternative. Hence neither spatial discretization nor model order reduction is done in the scope of this work. A model-predictive control structure has also been proposed to ensure the stability of the controlled system, as well as its ability to appropriately track given set points within a finite time horizon. 


(ref)
(more state delay, rarely observered in chemeng)
(add picture with recycle delay)
submit in pred ctrl 
christich delay